So with the innovation program, they had a thing
called the TIG, Technology Innovation Group.
And the thrust of this was to try to develop new
technologies. And as it turned out, this focused
largely on computer technology in all the cities.
and
waste
disposal technologies and stuff like that. And we
had I don't know how many cities we eventually
worked with. I think it was something between 50
and 60 cities in the state of Texas. In addition to
that, we had, through the NSF program, we created a
backup agency to help Little Rock, Arkansas, and
Boulder, Colorado.
So it was a tremendously successful program. And
then in the, what, about 76, I guess it was, then we
hired Don Moore, who replaced me as the director of
the center. And of course it went on up until the
early 80s, and the federal funding report
disappeared, and things went downhill pretty
rapidly. It was a separate center at that time, and
I had nothing to do with it. And then
the HUD support dried up and NSF support dried up.
And I guess, to me, one of the saddest elements of
that whole thing was that the cities wouldn't
support us. And I guess I shouldn't have been too
surprised at that, but I was.
We had, over the decade of the 70s or the last half of
it, We had developed,
I thought, excellent rapport with the cities.
They're very applied in their concerns. And you
have to be careful about the words that you use in
working with them. For example, we learned rather
quickly, you don't say research. Because when you
say research, a city councilman in Abilene or
whatever will conjure up some guy in a white coat
surrounded by test tubes. And they're not
interested in funding anyone, so we called it
property-solving. But in spite of that, and in
spite of the fact that we had done, I thought, a hell
of a lot of good things for the cities, Don Moore,
and there was never a more able guy, Don Moore was
just unable to draw any support from Texas cities
to continue
that. And when Dr. Porter took over TEAS, his edict
was, if it can't be self-supporting,
I'm not interested in supporting it. And I think
it's wrong of you, frankly, but because this still
is a land grant college, I think we still have duty
to
help
the people of the state of Texas, and I think that's
one of the things that we've done. But I went to him
when the Center was essentially given, the
program operation was essentially given back to
me with a recommendation that put some T's money
into it to keep it going, because I thought that the
federal funding would eventually swing the
pendulum and swing back the other way. And there
would be money coming. I've seen these
oscillations within the
federal staff before, and I thought it would occur
again. But Skip wasn't interested in that. And
with his background, I didn't understand that. So
although it still exists on paper, And we still do a
few little things. A
couple of years ago, we did some things for the City
of Edinburgh in South Texas. And so we still have
that thrust. But as you're aware, there is now a new
center for affairs set up, which incidentally
draws on some of the faculty that were involved
with us in the Old Urban Program Center. And that's
great. I think it's nice to have that. The problem
it will have is that there is no keys
involved, so they won't have any. And so they're
going to be scraping along with what they can. and
of course
some of the liberal arts faculty and others are
empowered to use some of their academic time for
research. It's different than it is here at the
Tees, of course. We want to do research, so we have
to invest in one. But over there, professors are
given release time from their teaching chores to
do research. And so they can do, you know, they can
do some things. So there are some guys in liberal
arts that want to do that work with the cities.
There are a couple, three guys in business
administration. And, of course, Rossler in urban
planning and architecture. And these are the same
people, at least the same organizations that we
have involved in the arts of the city. So in any
event, that was too much detail, I'm sure, on the
Center for Integral Arts. I hadn't really gotten
enough on that chapter or something. It was a
fascinating time, fascinating experience. The
Center for Strategic Technology, how did that
come about? Oh, my land. How many more takes did you
have? How much time did you have? We got another
hour. Hours were a thing. Oh, my. Do you want the
full story on that? I guess so.
Well... Is this your idea? I'm sorry? Is this your
idea? Oh, yeah. Yeah, I guess. Again, coupled with
Mr. Benson. He deserves credit. Um...
Well... I guess the original ideas
sprang from some things that began to occur in the
mid-70s.
I think the first time we started even
verbalizing, he and I, notions that gradually
over a period of time shape themselves into what is
now the center. I guess that was probably late 74
and mid-75. And the thrust of it was the following.
It was clear that Texas A&M aspired to greatness.
It wants to be a great university. And it was also
clear that, you know, as I've already said, back in
the 50s it was a great educational institution.
But it was a kind of insular sort of,
had very limited viewpoints, very limited
outlook and outreach. And of course, as the
research program was started by Mr. Rudder and Mr.
Parson, it flowered. And of course, that outreach
effort expanded. And our worldly awareness, if
you will, expanded. And there was also a
realization that every great
news, again, if you look at MIT and Stanford and
Telecom, what makes them great? Well, as we've
already said, it's not their
academic programs.
It's part of the old graduate programs, but
certainly not undergraduate programs. And
research programs, yeah. But more than that, they
apply their expertise to
solve problems that are sort of like the old RAIN
program, problems that are associated with
national
needs.
So, and it also helps to have people appointed
to high places. So you see Henry Kissinger come in
from Harvard, and the
Secretaries of Defense from MIT and Stanford. And
that
helps the image of greatness. And what this all
boiled down to was that we wanted to try to insert
Texas A&M more into national and international
affairs, more into attacking the great
problems of our time, if you want to be that
grandiose about it. And it was just felt that in
addition to having a damn good academic program,
undergraduate and graduate, in addition to
having a damn good research program,
we wanted to do more. we wanted to insert ourselves
into some of the national decision-making
processes. And I remember writing Mr. Benson a
memo back in, I think, 75, where I told him I was
concerned about Texas A&M's image as, I think my
words were, a football, military-oriented Cal
College. an image that
to some extent was
deserved, but to a large extent was not deserved.
And that I thought we needed to have a, I just called
it a special research program, that would be aimed
at dispelling that image and creating a new image.
And so I told him some notions I had about how to
proceed with this. He, I told him that as I surveyed
the faculty that was appropriate to this effort,
and this has to be guys, I mean these have to be
faculty members who have
national or international reputation. People
that were sort of like E.F. Hutton, you know, when
they taught folks, listen,
we didn't have them. within
the College of Engineering. I could count them,
again, on the things of my family. And so I told him
that I thought we ought to get some money from our
affluent graduates, Mr. Sackler and others. We
always were Mr. Sackler. We always needed money,
and he always used it. And I thought we ought to get a
little bundle of cash. Well, maybe not such a
little bundle. And we
ought to go by people, people that have clout,
people that have international expertise. And it
doesn't take many. You need some sort of critical
mass. I mean, one guy's not going to make it, but
three or four, yeah. Again, if they were working in
complementary areas, you couldn't have a guy here
and another guy there. To some extent, I'm here
walking teeth. and uh well in any event that was the
thrust of that memo and he thought that was great
and so he marched promptly over to the dr williams
office laid it on him and dr williams thought it was
great but he said it needs to be focused well over
the next uh next few weeks and months he focused it
And it now exists
as the Center
for Free Enterprise Research and Education. And
I'll never forget the day that that decision was
made that it was going to be given to economics. Mr.
Benson came into my office with a characteristic
full of esteem,
and he was livid. And kind of as a sop, why, Dr.
Williams had put Mr. Madison on the
Board of Advisors or something like that. And
don't misunderstand. We couldn't fault and do not
fault the thrust of that Senate. It is a very
worthwhile thing to do, and it's a job that needs to
be done,
and it should be pursued. should be pursued more
aggressively, frankly, than I think it was
pursued right now. But nonetheless, that
operation sort of missed the target that we had
originally identified. And so during, that was
set up about, what, 76, I think, or maybe 77, I can't
remember. But over that next year, I can remember
Mr. Benson would go to these meetings of that board
of advisors, and he would come back boiling every
time. And because, again, it was sort of our idea
that had been perverted.
And so by 1977 then, He and I had agreed that we were
going to make another run. Of course, we had a new
administration at that time, and Dr. Williams was
out of the scene, out of the picture, and Garvey was
going to have
been taken over. And then some other interesting
things began to happen in 1977. we had begun to talk
with various government people about this idea,
and trying to get them to help us shape the thing.
And so we were visited in 77 by some fairly
high-ranking
Air Force men, and they said that You know, we need a
new
think
tank, a new defense-related think tank to do
several things. But the reason we need a new one is
that most of the existing think tanks have become
too institutionalized, or as they put it, one Air
Force officer said, they have become so much a part
of the Washington scene that they have begun to
feed on, and
we're not getting any fresh things out in any time.
We need a think tank that will do Soviet studies,
because a lot of our Soviet, existing Soviet
studies are too much based on the mirror image
syndrome, and what that means is that a
philosophical
viewpoint which looks at the Soviets as mirror
images of us, that fundamentally they're just
like us. They think like us. They want the same
things in the world as we do. They respond to
pressures in the world as we do. Of course, that's
just not true. But it did, and I did my first Soviet
piece of Soviet work back in 1942. before
I went back to Ohio State for graduate work. And so
I've seen the mirror
image syndrome in action, and it was exactly
right. Because I remember thinking that myself
when I was young and ignorant. And so they then
suggested that this new center, that we had still
somewhat ill-formed in our ought to have a very
definite national security thrust to it. And so
that was reflected in the way the Senate was
finally shaped. But if you look at our charter, you
will find that we are empowered
to look at energy systems, transportation
systems, urban systems. Mr. Benson, bless his
heart, fought
with the center
out and did all kinds of great things. And indeed,
in the first year of our operation, we were
focused, we had a fairly broad focus. And
incidentally, he was, was and is of the opinion
that the state of Texas sort of lurches from crisis
to crisis without any long-range planning. And so
the center's charter states that we will do
strategic
studies for the state of Texas, long-range
planning studies for the state of Texas. An
incredibly broad charter. Here again, it's sort
of, and he gave us some money to get it started, of
course. And he And he had his
characteristic viewpoint about this.
But he knew we were tackling, we were trying to slay
a much larger dragon. And here, he said, you have
that thing self-supporting for 10 years. And
that's what it would have taken to have functioned
the way
we had originally started.
So it was really with that charter that he took to
the Board of Regents in the spring of 78. And I'd
been a visiting professor over at the American
University in Cairo. And we didn't even have a name
for the damn thing at that time, at least that we had
settled on. And I remember when I was still in
Cairo, We telexed back and forth, and he had some
other name for it. And I remember telexing him and
telling him that it ought to be called
the Center for Strategic Technology. And so that
was the name that went forth to the Board of
Regents. But he talked about the input we'd had
from the Air Force officers
and the national security issues. He told them
that it was our intention to do classified work. It
was our intention to work with the intelligence
agencies. Well, can you imagine going to the Board
of Regents of Berkeley, UC Berkeley, with a
proposal like that? Never in Christ's name. But
with the rich military traditions, And
so we set about building yet another new program.
And then, of course, one
year into that,
Mr. Manson retired and Dr. Porter took over.
Again,
Dr. Porter wasn't interested
in long-term payoff. His directive to me was make
it self-supporting
as quickly as you can. And he said, I'll give you
three years. He didn't say that specifically, but
that was the message that I got. Well, the place
where there is money is DOD. And so we focused our
efforts almost
totally that opportunity. And we were
self-supporting it for years. Again, starting
from scratch, starting with no credibility. And
again, you know, even though the program took some
turns that were not originally envisioned, it
couldn't have happened without Teasman. And so
now we bring
in about a million
bucks
a year. We have about a million dollars a year. Of
that, I get $90,000 from teams. And the rest of it is
hustle. And I think as of the 1st of August, the
center will be five years old. And we've had a fair
amount of success. But again, it all starts with
T's.
Now, the center's focus has merit, right? Because
of funding? Temporarily, yes. But it is my
intention to broaden it as I can. So once you've got
one area financially solvent, so... Right. and
then get T's money to broaden that to New York?
Well,
I don't know that we
can get T's money to New York. I did get a, this next
year they will give me $120,000. And I intend to use
that additional $30,000 to try to broaden that.
One of my colleagues, Dr. Bragg, is now
interacting with the governor's office and
that's a very very slow process but but we are
trying to pursue this responsibility that we have
to do some advanced planning for the state we have
had a couple little things we did an incredible
study for the state of texas and see the when the
center was formed Mr. Bradley had left the
Industrial Economics
Research Division to take over TEKS. And so that
was brought in to the Center for Strategic
Technology. Again, the thought being that that
could be the focus for our state efforts. And if
we'd had a little bit more But the economic
development,
industrial development monies began
to dry up. And so we've lost most of the people that
populated that effort. And as a matter of fact, Dr.
Bragg, I guess, is the only one that's left. But
yes, we will try to live up to the charter
that was originally described for the center. And
I think our defense program is in relatively good
shape now, and it's just a question of doing the
necessary promotion and establishing
credibility to get involved in these other areas.
And I think we can do it. You talk about
interdisciplinary work problems. Mostly you're
dealing with engineering, but in this center you
have to
go outside of engineering. Is that a bigger
problem, or is it pretty much the same as just
getting engineers to work? Oh, it's basically the
same problem there, but it's... It has a little bit
different connotation to it, a little bit
different complexion to it, I guess I should say.
Yeah, you're right. We have had in the center, in
this center, people from folks in sociology
working for us right now. We've had people from
history, from
business
administration, one guy from architecture, and a
few from engineering. The problems we encounter
in that are, well, we still have this problem of Say
we have a person from sociology who's going to work
for us. Well, okay, suppose he or she comes over and
just does some really outstanding work for us. I
can't affect their promotion. Their promotion is
handled through the sociology department. So the
only damn thing I can do, do-do, is to, in the fall of
the year, when tenure and promotion concerns
are operational, I write the dean and the
department head of the appropriate college and
department head and give them an accounting of how
that person has performed. And that's the most I
can do. So I guess that's the most difficult
problem we have. The other problem deals with
classified work. And here again, you have to
assess the attitude
of the dean and department head in question. If
they want a young man or a young woman to publish,
then you dastardly get them involved in
classified work. And
so on those, when we encounter that situation,
we've had a few circumstances. There's a man in
political science, whom I will not name, who has
been interested in our work. But I have had to take
him aside and tell him, look, getting involved
with us may be hazardous to your academic health.
And of course in that case we have a department that
is controlled not by the dean, not by the
department head, but by a committee of four
professors. And none of whom are Soviet experts,
none of whom give a flip for Soviet work. And so A
young man ain't going to ride Soviet boat
to promotion and tenure in that department
because it has to be approved by the full press. And
so he has to be, in effect, a traitor to his own cause
and go over the hurdles that they set up for him,
namely, you know, you will do such and such kind of
work, you will publish in this journal and that
journal, but not in those, and you won't publish
things through the Senate, which would be in the
court, you know. And so in that case, then, what we
tend to do, we tend to do two things. We will go to a
tenured full professor who has all of these things
and can tell the department head or the dean to go to
him and get him involved. And we have some of those.
Or we'll go outside. If
you walk across the hall, across the office area,
you'll meet Dr. Jamie Kipp. He's from Kansas
State. A historian. Tremendous guy. He's an
expert on the Soviet Navy, an expert on the Soviet
military, doing the Soviet Navy. Incredible guy.
And he has, he has, we have a summer fellows program
here. Because many of these guys have nine months
And
so he is here for his second summer. And then we
support him and his graduating students during
the year. This is with federal money. And we've had
Dr. Bill Fuller at the Harvard Russian Research
Center. Can you imagine Texas A&M sponsoring work
at Harvard? It happens. Dr. Bill Zimmerman,
the University of Michigan, Dr. Ivan Volkis,
the University of Nebraska. We will have two
gentlemen from the Air Force Academy with us this
summer for short stays. He's going to Scotland.
Oh, Erickson. Well, I wasn't... He's not Summer
Phillip, but that's a... That's a special case. We
have to talk about John.
But, you know, there's somebody else... I don't
know their U.S. But in any event...
That's
the general way we've solved that problem.
Now, let me pursue this, because it may be of
interest to whomever is listening to this tape a
hundred years from
now. Dr. Porter has suggested that we might go hire
a full-time research instead of using faculty to
staff our research teams. And he and I have had
another rather serious disagreement over
that. And
don't misunderstand me. We just have different
points of view here. We're not wild-eyed enemies
of one another. I think we have a great deal of
respect for one another. But I have trouble with
that. because my view is if you're going to have
full-time research people, then why the hell not
have a Southwest Research Institute or a Battelle
or whatever? Or putting it the other way, my view is
that anybody that our principal job as an
institution is teaching still, and you can talk
about the research program and you can talk about
influencing national decision-making
processes, but all of that ought to impact the
teaching and educational process, the
intellectual development of the young people,
because that's why we're here, first and
fundamentally.
And so having a bunch of people that never see a
student, never go into a classroom, I don't dig
that at all. I have great philosophical
But if we can't solve some of these other problems,
if I can't get my hands on the faculty
that I need, then what am I to do? I guess I can either
say, well, you know, we will attenuate the growth
of the center to fit whatever we can draw on, or we
can go out and have the answer.
Well,
he and I had a rather serious discussion about that
about six months ago. And I was ready to submit
my resignation letter because it was just
philosophically not acceptable to me. But we came
to an accommodation. And what we agreed
was that as long as 50% of the program would somehow
impact the
teaching function. Fine. When
it gets to be 51%, that's when I leave. So that's
the interdisciplinary problem is a far reaching
one. It has a lot of impact, as you can see from this
discussion.
And I don't know how to solve it. Because certainly
other colleges, other departments
have
different views. And of course, there are those
who think that the center is a wrong operation. In
other words, they will say, as soon as you take
money from DOD, you're sold. and I say, your ass is
bought, that you're dancing to their tune. Well, I
suppose
with some that may be true, but it's not true here.
And now it's true that DOD will tell us, they will
give us money to do a specific piece of research. I
mean, they will give you, well, incredible as it
may seem, I have got a little chunk of money And
the guy said, I asked
him, I said, what do you want to do with it? Is there
anything you want to do with it? Which is . That's
not strictly true. It has to be related to space
things, but within the space of anything that you
want to do. But most of it, most of them, all the rest
of the money that we get out of it is specifically
the record. So they do specify the topics that we
study, but they don't specify the way we do our
research. And above all, they don't specify the
results of our research.
And I don't have
any problem with that. I don't think it restricts
us at all. So, but clearly if, and already because
of the success we have had, Dr. Porter has asked me,
how big is the center going to get? How big do you
want to be? Because I think he perceives that we
could probably be almost as big as we wanted to be.
And that's a good question. I don't know. My answer
to him was a kind of a pat answer. an evasive answer
because I said to him that I want to be as big as we
have to be to meet our service needs to Texas A&M.
And I
don't really know what that is. I don't know how
many faculty might want to get involved with us.
when it comes to influence any national
decision-making processes, I do want to insert
Texas A&M into that process, into that whole
business. I want to see more Texas A&M faculty
testifying before Congress. When I was at
Maryland, it just hurt me. It still hurts me to go to
Washington and when Congress needs expertise,
and law would be not always, but most of the time
will be some guy from MIT or Stanford, and that just
gripes
me badly. And there are times when when a
southwestern
viewpoint on
certain national issues needs to
be inserted. And that's not to say that we've got
all the right answers or anything. But you know,
we've, you know, back in 20 years ago, we had guys
like Lyndon Johnson and John Connery and Holden
Teague and
many others who represented this area. Now, I
wouldn't want to say that I supported those guys in
everything they did or said, because I didn't. On
the other hand, they represented the area well.
They inserted regional
viewpoints into the national decision-making
processes. And now they're gone. And Conley's
still around, of course, but he's not influential
anymore in the national sense. And I think to some
extent, we can't fill those shoes, but to some
extent, We ought to try. I think one of the things we
can do is to represent the people of the state of
Texas in some of these matters. And
so I want us to pursue that as aggressively as we
can. Well, I've testified before Congress, but
it's been a situation where I'm sitting here in the
fold around a friend of mine in Washington who knew
that I had certain kinds of expertise, would say,
hey, Dick, could you come on and offer some
testimony? Yeah. Well, that's a passive system.
And Aggies ain't passive. We're active. And so
what I would like to do is to have a situation where
we could understand what was going on in Congress
and the issues that they were going to be
confronting. When a certain area came up in which
we had expertise, not here within the center, but
within the college or within the university, that
we could put a guy on an airplane and get him up there
before Congress. And that we could do research and
do studies that would influence some of the
actions. So I don't know how big we're going to
grow. that clearly one way or another we are going
to have to solve that problem of doing
interdisciplinary work. Because there aren't
any of these issues that are narrowly focused.
They almost always
involve a breadth of disciplines. So somehow
we've got to solve that problem. Well,
of course, Erickson deserves a lot of credit for
the success
that
the cinema has had. I first met John in 1979, just
about the time that the cinema was formed. I don't
know how much you know about John Erickson. Oh, I
know a little to the history part. Yeah,
hopefully. Well, he's, if you listed the top five
or six Western criminologists
or experts on the Soviet military, that he would
have to be among them. He's a brilliant man, a
genius by any standard. speaks six languages
fully as a
photographic memory. Couldn't find his way
through the DFW airport unaided if his life
depended on it, you know, he's a thoroughgoing
academician and just one public man. The
relationship with Erickson began
Really, it had its roots in the productivity
program, if you believe. I had been appointed to
this Air Force oversight committee
to look over the equipment for the whole program.
You see, the ICANN program, the manufacturing
program. And a young Air Force captain who was
involved in that program lived next door to a guy
who had been a member of the Colonel Lynn Kelsey.
who is on our staff here, but he is on Lynn. And Lynn
had been selected as an Air Force Research
Associate and had spent a year with John over in
Illinois. And so, through this Air Force Captain,
I got Lynn's name and he was in the Pentagon at that
time and stopped by to see him. And that led to
John's visiting Texas A&M. And then an
interesting incident happened. You know, you
look at these things, dear, and you have to prove
that somebody upstairs is looking out for you.
It's incredible how these things happen. John has
enjoyed support from the Pentagon for many years
because of his incredible
understanding of the Second Posture. But of
course the Pentagon cannot give money directly to
a foreign institution. And so it has to be
laundered. It has to be channeled through another
organization. And one of the At that time, the
organization was one of the important